I can't remember that there was particularly. I remember when I first started to
write, I was in New York, and I was on the beach from the ships. And I needed
money badly. I went to see an editor, and he gave me an assignment for a sports
story. And I've never been a sports addict. And it had to do with basketball,
and I didn't know basketball at all. But he had given me an assignment. I was
going to get my $40, which is what they paid in those days. I was hard at work
at it, and the idea for Bianca Sands came in flat-wise. And I said, in fact, go
away. I'm busy. And the idea came back again. And I said, well, finally, oh, all
right. And then I wrote it in about three hours, that's all, just to get it out
on my way. And then I finished the sports story, which I sold eventually. But I
put that manuscript in the bottom drawer. I knew I had a very unusual story
here, and I kept it like one of the family jewels. And in about three years, I
got hungry enough to say, well, I've got to sell the family jewels. And I found
to my amazement I couldn't give the story away. It was nearly ten years before
anybody would look seriously at it. But in the meantime, where I submitted it,
it made, well, there were two occasions, once an editor and once an agent.
They'd say, bring your stuff around and have a look at it, you know. I'd come
around on Tuesday, I'd go in on Tuesday, and the secretary would say, go on in
there. And here's the guy sitting there, and he's trembling with anger. He's
furious. He says, here, take this stuff. Once he pushed it off onto the floor, I
had to pick it up. Take this stuff and get out of here. I don't want to deal
with anybody who writes a story like Beyond Kershan. Get out of here. Why?
What's the matter? Why do you say that? Never mind. I don't want to talk about
it. I left very hurt, very pausable, and not knowing what was going on with
these people. Anyway, finally, a friend of mine wrote to me from England. There
was a literary contest in England in a magazine called Argosy, and the deadline
was New Year's Eve. Well, I got his letter Christmas Eve. So I dug this thing
out of the trunk and ran it through the tape without changing anything and sent
it off, and it must have arrived, you know, within minutes of the deadline. And
it won the contest, and I beat Graham Greene and John Pudney and a number of
famous people and got the first check I'd ever seen for over $1,000 and got much
glory out of it. and it too has been rebranded a great number of times but
that's the backstory on that but where the idea came from I cannot really tell
you
ok I guess this is sort of an obvious observation but let me make it anyhow I
would suppose that in your fiction you're much more concerned with mankind's
psychological future than his technological future yeah I think I think they're
intertwined but my interest in technology is intense and I keep up as much as
anybody can with new developments in science and technology but yes it is a
human quantum that took greatest importance to me I'm fascinated by human beings
almost as if I wasn't exactly one of them and kept on investigating to find out
what made them tick you're also optimistic about man's future aren't you yes I
have an ultimate faith, I think things are going to get a lot worse before they
get better. But I have enough faith in the human animal to feel that after a
hundred years and all this of marching in step and dressing alike that he'll
crack out of it and spread his wings again, and this time in a much better way
than ever before. It's so stupid. Nations act in ways that would not be
permitted in any well-run kindergarten. squabbling and grabbing and punching
each other and bullying and so on. You can see it in the microcosm in the
kindergarten class. The nations are behaving exactly the same way. Only this
time it looks like they can wipe the door off. They have that capability. Still,
as they say, I have faith in humanity as well. Okay, Mr. Sturgeon. I don't have
too many more. Are you still doing okay? Oh, yeah. Okay. Hang on a second. Yeah.
I got a perennial frog in my throat. Okay. What else have you got? Okay. What
changes have you seen in science fiction since you began writing back in the
30s? Oh, well, I've seen a tremendous amount of change. for one thing I think
it's larger to the impact of fantasy and science fiction magazine and Anthony
Boucher and that kind of thing has stayed with that magazine all along where it
let in people who had real
literary abilities that they were afraid to show when it was just back in the
hammer and Russian hard healing of the pulp era people began to write things
that they really felt and they write it in a higher literary style and that too
can be called a pulp magazine but my goodness Tony began including poetry in it
and a great deal of erudition and philosophical ideas and poetic notions and the
kind of fantasy that preceded Tolkien and that was a huge influence on the field
and it has now spread all through the field some of the writing you find in
science fiction is fine as far as any writing done anywhere in the whole world
in any era Vladimir Nabokov who was just about on the top level of literatures
his last novel was a science fiction novel a lot of people don't realize that
it's called Eta and it has to do with the world in which the Germans had won the
first world war and the things that happened to the world after that and it was
purely an alternate universe story.
The other thing that's happened, of course, is women. There have always been
women in science fiction. As a matter of fact, somebody who started science
fiction as we know it was a woman. The lady who wrote Frankenstein as she was a
teenager. If I had a time machine, I would go back and talk to that lady. I
really would. She must have been something else. Amazing woman. Amazing.
interesting, I think she was 19 when she wrote Frankenstein, Mary Shelley.
But the women who have been into science fiction, one of the very best was Judy
Merrill, back in the 40s. She wrote some of the, well, if you look in the Hall
of Fame of science fiction, you'll find a Judy Merrill story in there called
That Only a Mother, which was not only, it was not only a Judy Merrill story,
but it was the first story she'd ever written, the First sale she ever made. She
sold her first story, and that was it. Just an extraordinary story. Really
powerful. Then there are people, like I just mentioned, in Wild Seeds, for
example, is a lovely story. There's Ursula K. Le Guin, who has won a National
Book Award. There's Doris Bissertia, whose ideas are always so totally
unexpected. There's Elizabeth Lynn. There's... oh, on and on and on, the women
in science fiction are just extraordinary. Another lady in Detroit said to me
that up to now it's been, the woman has to work twice as hard and be twice as
good as a man before she can get the same recognition. And then she added,
fortunately, that's not difficult. Which is a great line. But I admire the women
in science fiction so very much. Somebody said recently that there are so many
excellent women in science fiction that at long last it's possible to say that
they found a mediocre one. And it has been true. They've had to be better than
the men to get where they are. One of the great revelations in science fiction,
of course, you probably know about was James Tiptree. Yes. Yeah. Who turns out
after having a shattering success to be a lady by the name of Alice Sheldon that
was a great astonishment to a lot of people she kept her head under her wing for
so long that also the rumors started that she was a CIA man or that she was a
collaboration between you know Jerry Pournelle and somebody else or something but
no sir she's her own man she's good oh she's good says Kate Wilhelm oh right
she's a beautiful steady prose very very good that's the Damon Knight's wife so
I'm more pleased than almost anything else about science fiction that has let
the women in to such a total degree and they're good almost every single one of
them has really got something unique to bring to the field and to literature as
a whole I'm fascinated by women I love the way they think there is a difference
I'm not talking just equality because there is a difference between the way men
think and the way women do. And I'm utterly fascinated by the way women think,
which leads us back to the whole business of ESP and the qualities of the
developing mind. I think women have shown certain qualities way, way ahead of
the rest of us. Okay. Are you disappointed, though, that science fiction has
sort of remained as a separate genre, that it's not recognized combined with
mainstream literature? Well, in a way it is. If you look at mainstream
literature these days, you'll find that science fiction is permeating it. I have
a feeling that the whole business of science fiction being a separate field is
shaped pretty much like the handle of a suitcase. That is, in the mid-20s, when
it began to come out of the main body of literature, and it got stronger and
thicker, and it's going right back in again where it came from. But it's going
to color everything it touches, and it already has. I have just mentioned, for
example, Fladyburn-Avacos' last novel. There's people like Marquez, who won the
Pulitzer Prize last year for a fascinating book called A Century of Loneliness.
there's people who are recognized as literatures like Kurt Vonnegut who has
never written anything but science fiction although he refused to have the word
used on any of his books or contracts because he didn't want to be tainted by
that particular ghetto Ray Bradbury came up out of the science fiction field and
is regarded as a foremost literateur
yeah science fiction is becoming the mainstream really look at all the pictures
that came out last year for example last summer with a heavy emphasis on science
fiction people are beginning to realize that this forefront thinking is
predictive or precognitive thinking is of some moment there are a lot of people
who would not recognize that 1984 was a science fiction novel until very
recently I mean Kingsley Amis once wrote that the reaction to the general public
and the so-called serious critic to science fiction is, hey, this is good. This
can't be science fiction. Or, hey, this is science fiction. It can't be good.
And this is the ghetto that science fiction has had to grow up in. But if you
can survive in a ghetto, you generally come out strong. And I think that's the
case with science fiction now. But I stuck with it not because I couldn't write
other kinds of things and probably do quite well not because i simply love the
field and the freedom that it gives me okay excellent uh you've written before i
guess you still agree with this that science fiction is wisdom did i write that
yes yeah i think that's true i don't remember writing that but i if you say i
did i did uh yes i think it is and as i say my trademark is the letter q with
the arrow through it which is asked the next question and essentially that's how
wisdom is acquired I think you were talking about the derivation of the word
science the Greek base of it that's true yeah that's right okay I guess it
wasn't wisdom it was knowledge okay Scientia means knowledge yeah wisdom is
certainly knowledge applied I think that defines wisdom pretty well it's
interesting too that but wisdom is something that pragmatically changes as the
times change. That is to say, what is wise in one era is not wise in another.
It's wise now, for example, to ask the next question, and the one that follows,
and the one that follows. Time was when you could burn to the stake for that.
Okay. How much science fiction are you writing these days? well
not a heck of a lot at the moment I'm involved at the moment in a tremendous
script six sides of an LP for Cadman Records and I'm doing a novel called
Winesburg Ohio by Sherwood Anderson it's a magnificent book and I'm turning that
into a script which will have a celebrity cast and original music and sound
effects and so on. My wife is also doing one for Cadman. She has just completed
The Sound of the Pure, the William Faulkner on six sides of an LP. It's a
herculean task because it's a beast of a book to write. The chronology is so
strange. She's also done Breakfast at Tiffany's. And, so we've been pretty
involved in that kind of thing. But I'm not abandoning science fiction by any
means. Well, you're still doing book reviews, aren't you? Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's
neat. It fills my house up with books that I don't have to pay for. Is that why
you do them? That's one of the reasons. But that's not the real reason. I'm
always interested in the trends of people thinking. And when you do book
reviews, you find things about it, these motivations. Certain things settle like
a network over all sorts of writers, established ones and new ones, like a huge
net. For example, all of a sudden, everybody's going to be writing stories about
other worlds or other situations or other planets. And then the next thing you
know, there'll be a whole spontaneous outpouring of books that have to do with,
well, in both literature and in the movies. It's in The Possessed Child, for
example. And you see these trends coming, and you don't know where they come
from. But all of a sudden, everybody starts writing, or many, many people start
writing a certain kind of fiction. And they're not imitating each other. There's
a friend of mine who is a journalist in North Carolina and he sent me two
stories asking what I thought of them and maybe I could help him place them. And
one of them was Tron, which was a Disney movie. I wouldn't very like it except
that it was done in pinball machines instead of electronic games and the other
one was F. Paul Wilson's The Keep which had to do with buried vampire during
World War II and a lot of friction between an SS man and a regular German
officer and these two stories were written you know with absolutely no notion
that they were being done elsewhere by other writers it's an interesting
phenomenon but a book reviewer as it could look at that particular thing You
said you have no idea why certain trends or things like that start, say the
popularity of fantasy or horror today Well, part of it as far as Hollywood is
concerned, of course that's purely imitative I mean, somebody comes along with
The Exorcist and immediately I saw part of one just last night although I
generally have vanished television from my life altogether Jane and I decided
we're not going to look at television anymore, period. And for that, we got what
I can call an eight-day week. You have no idea how much extra time you've got if
you never look at the two. You miss one or two really good things. But my
roommate here upstairs has television going almost all the time. And as I pass
back and forth, I get a glimpse of the screen. There was a part of one last
night that had to do with a possessed child and a priest coming to perform an
exorcism and so on. These things are purely imitative. Then when you get some
deep space stories, they begin to look terribly similar to one another. The air
is full of Star Wars imitations of one sort or another. There's Star Wars, and
then on television there's Galactica, which is about as derivative as you can
get, and so on. Hollywood feels that if anything is successful, you immediately
jump on the bandwagon and make as many more as the traffic will bear along the
same general scene. Or sooner or later, they lose money on it and go on to
something else. But the truly original idea is a very great deal of difficulty
in getting in to either television or the movies and with a little less trouble
into the mainstream. That's not like what's popular today, they'll tell you, you
know. Did you ever hear of a book called A Wrinkle in Time? Yeah. Well, Madeline
Lengle wrote that after having published one book as a young girl, which turned
her from a writer into an author. And then she wrote Wrinkle, not because of
science fiction or anything else. It was just the stories she wanted to write.
And it was turned down 22 times. 22 publishers turned that down to the point
where she and her husband, he was an actor and things were bad in the acting
business. They scraped together what pennies they had and opened a Crossroads
store in Connecticut. And about nine years later, somebody suggested that she
submit Wrinkle again, and she became practically hysterical. But the second time
out it hit, and as you know, it's a prize-winning novel now, which is really up
there in the Hall of Fame. It's a great book. But it wasn't like anything that
was in the trend in those days. Nobody could understand it, and nobody would
believe anybody would want to read it. And it's a delightful, powerful book. So
it just shows you that you have to kind of run at the speed where the train is
running before you can climb aboard. And to be totally original or to be running
in the opposite direction, sometimes you can grab on, but not always. Okay, back
to yourself for just a few seconds here. You're not the type of writer who plans
out a book or a story well ahead of time, are you? No, although I have done it
that way. usually it's a little image that still catch fire like I mentioned
with more than human it came to with the image of the old monk taking care of
these starving children in the cave in the woods he wasn't a main character in
that book and the ones in my book weren't exactly that kind of thing either but
it was just the image that took off from that and I suppose as you write all
these other ideas cluster on Venus plus X was a way of getting off my chest a
whole lot of feelings that I had about our civilization as a whole and the
things that were pushing it around particularly this business of sex
differentiation in order to see what it would be like if we didn't have that in
a culture and so I structured the whole novel around that but you'll see that
the book is built with alternate storylines one is very contemporary the other
one is in this strange country of the Le Dôme and they're double sax but it
comes always sometimes I do structure them but mostly it comes from a flash of
that also it's very difficult for me to write at all writing comes very hard to
me indeed including writing letters, which accounts for the size of my phone
bill.
However, when one of those things hit me, I would write for 30 hours at a time
and just fall over sideways, go off somewhere and convalesce. And so I'm not a,
I don't rewrite almost everything I've ever written is just exactly the way it
came out of the typewriter the first time. So how the infrastructure appears and
the spacing of smaller crises and all tying together into a large one at the end
and so on, I don't know where that comes from. That just happens. So I consider
myself very fortunate in that. I would be a lot better off, however, if I wrote
more, but I don't. My bibliography looks a lot longer than it really is because
I've been reprinted so much, I've been very lucky there. Yeah, in that respect,
the things that you've written. This is probably not a fair question to ask an
author, and a lot of them really don't want to answer it. But do you have any
particular works of your own that you think are particularly good that you're
proud of? Certain stories, yeah. The Silk and Swift, the unicorn story, for
example, I'm very proud of. I love that story. And I've just written a new
story, which will appear, or is appearing right now, Well, in Germany, the deal
there is that they get an original story and they hang on to it until six months
after publication. And then I'm free to sell it anywhere else and you'll
probably read it. And it seems to be a very simple story. Indeed, it's called
Seasoning. It's about a guy who has a kind of a metaphysical experience. And
it's not anywhere near as simple a story as it seems to be. And I'm very proud
of that one. You'll see it in due course.
let's see looking for others of what I would call my favorite stories I do like
that uniform story I like the way it's written it's a very passionate story and
it has something I consider very important to say
there again I was combating the assumption that a woman who is not a virgin is
not as good a woman as she might be
Yeah, I remember that story. That was the basic statement of the story. It's
wonderful that it came out in case that way because I love the way that story
was written.
Okay, listen. Oh, then, of course, there's The Dreaming Jewels, which is great
fun to write. And another novel I wrote called, was it Cosmic Rape, which you
don't see around very much anymore. It'll be reissued sometimes. What I like
about that story is that it has in it, I don't know, 18 or 20 different
storylines and the way they're all pulled together at the end absolutely amazes
me. It really genuinely amazes me how I could get that many completely disparate
story ideas and pull them all together into the same place. So we read that
thing and said, gosh, how did he do that? And then I realized that he who did it
was me. Wasn't The Dreaming Jewels your first novel? Yeah, and there was a great
deal I did not know about writing novels at that time, and so it is flawed as a
novel. But it has some good writing in it.
Yeah, okay. I've often heard this quoted, and I wondered what the impetus or the
occasion for it was. and that is Sturgeon's Law. Oh, that came about sometime in
the 50s, and I can't remember exactly where it was, but it was at a science
fiction convention, and there was somebody who came to, you know, some people
like to make an impact by getting a whole bunch of people who liked a particular
thing and coming up and tearing it all to pieces. And he'd done his homework. He
got a copy of every magazine that was in the hotel newsstand. in every book, and
he apparently spent all night leafing through them, and he had a whole forearm
full of books and magazines with bookmarks in them. And he convulsed the
audience there for about 40 minutes with examples of some of the worst syntax,
some of the dumbest dialogue, some of the most improbable science, and so on,
which in those days there was science fiction was a whole lot of it. And then he
said to me right on stage, will you not concede that this science fiction is 90%
crap? And I had this rush of brains to the head, and I answered him by saying,
yes, but that's only because 90% of everything is crap, which quite took the
wind out of his sails. Then I was able to go on and develop the idea, which is
only true, that science fiction has been in the ghetto for so long that people
say, oh, this is like Kingsley Amis said. This is science fiction. It can't be
good. and it was unique as a literary genre in that it was not permitted its
spectrum of poor and good that is to say in the mystery field everybody could
distinguish between let's say Mickey Spillane and somebody like Niall Marsh or
Dorothy L. Sayers there's this spectrum of excellence there some of these things
are better than others same thing in the westerns Hopalong Cassidy is not the
same thing as Best Three Rides a Game but science fiction it was all Buck
Rogers, Zapped Guns and Space in the year 2200 and nobody would have twice found
that there was good science fiction and bad science fiction and excellent and
poor writing and that caused my response but since then that's been called
Sturgeon's Law that 90% of this is bad because 90% of everything is bad present
company accepted of course okay Okay.
How do you retain your optimism? Why hasn't the world beaten you down? Well,
I've had my depressive periods, but usually they've been personal and not
species, if you'll see what I mean. I share the awe of humanity that Shakespeare
did when he wrote that beautiful passage what a piece of work is a man, how
noble in reason. Remember that, How Godlike in his aspects. And I've always had
that feeling about humanity. It's an extraordinary development in the universe.
Extraordinary. And it's our potential, really, that excites and thrills me the
most. I think that in being created, we were given the ability to solve all our
problems. That doesn't mean to say we were given the solutions to all our
problems. I didn't say that. But if you have a little girl who is dying of
leukemia at the age of five, that seems like a terrible injustice. But the
ability to solve that problem is with us. Even the fact of her death can
contribute to it. We're the one species that is given this ability all the way
through to solve our own problem. And if we don't take advantage of that
ability, of course, we're doomed. But the point is that we do have that ability.
I marvel at that. Absolutely marvel at that. So this is really the basis of my
look for humanity as a whole. Do you have any plans for any future science
fiction? Oh yeah, yeah. I've got a number of things going. I'm outlining a book
called Star Anguish, which has to do with... I'm not quite sure of the framework
that it will have. At first I was thinking of the kind of government and the
development of a moral and ethical posture for a spaceship on a 20,000-year
voyage and to watch the generations develop and the kind of religions and
morality and so on that would come and go during that kind of history. But I'm
beginning to have two thoughts about that, but I think I'll take that main theme
and use it in some other framework. But I knew its title. It's called Star
Anguish.
Okay, good. Listen, this is taking a lot of your time, Mr. Surgeon. Maybe we'd
better stop right about here. Yeah, I've got to get back to the script. I'm
going to work all tonight and all tomorrow. Listen, maybe I'll get to meet you
this summer. I've applied for the James Gunn's Institute in Kansas this summer.
I sure hope that makes. Do you have any idea if it will? I certainly hope so,
Daryl. and as far as I know, it is going forward. I'm going to Wichita on
Thursday and we'll probably learn more about it then. Okay, yeah, I certainly
hope it does work. Well, listen, Mr. Sturgeon, what we'll do is to edit these
tapes and I'm sure we'll get a couple of weeks worth of shows out of them
because each show is only about five minutes. And so we'll probably get at least
two weeks of shows out of this. So we will send you the tapes when it's edited.
Right, that's fine. And if you want to wait until you have them all, instead of
sending me five minutes segments. Yeah. Oh, yeah, we'll do that. In fact, I'll
probably just bring them to you this summer, unless we mail them earlier, if I
see you there at Lawrence. That would be great. And you do have my mailing
address here. Yeah, let's see. This is the San Diego address? Okay. Yeah, 3505
Isla Vista Drive. That's the one. Mr. Surgeon, we sure appreciate the time
you've given us. Well, it's been a pleasure to talk to you. And I like things
like this because, you know, nobody knows what he believes until he tells
somebody else. Yeah, no, I've been very impressed with your work. And it's an
honor to talk to you. And I hope to meet you soon. Well, I'm looking forward to
it too, Daryl. Okay, then take care, Mr. Sturgeon. Bye. Bye.